docs: add Ratify v2 design scope discussion (#1905)
ratify-project/ratify: docs/discussion/Ratify v2 design scope.md

> Rativy v2 Deisgn Scope

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ratify v2 Deisgn Scope
```

Reviewer: Nit

=======================
Author: Binbin Li

## Table of Contents
- [Rativy v2 Deisgn Scope](#rativy-v2-deisgn-scope)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Background](#background)
  - [Goal](#goal)
  - [Scope](#scope)
    - [Refactoring](#refactoring)
      - [Cache Refactoring](#cache-refactoring)
      - [Policy Provider Refactoring](#policy-provider-refactoring)
      - [Configuration Refactoring](#configuration-refactoring)
      - [Reorganize the Codebase](#reorganize-the-codebase)
    - [Deprecations](#deprecations)
      - [CertificateStore](#certificatestore)
      - [Legacy Cosign Verifier](#legacy-cosign-verifier)
      - [License Checker Verifier](#license-checker-verifier)
      - [`Name` and `Type` fields in verifierReport/configuration](#name-and-type-fields-in-verifierreportconfiguration)
    - [New Features](#new-features)

## Background

> Ratify has been officially released for over a year and is widely adopted within the community. However, limitations in the current design and implementation make it challenging to extend functionality. This document outlines the scope of the upcoming v2 design to address these issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ratify has reached its first major release in over a year and has been widely adopted by users at scale. However, there are known limitations in the current design and implementation of Ratify v1 make it challenging to extend functionality. This document outlines these known limitations and proposes solutions for a more lightweight and extensible framework.
```

2. The legacy Cosign verifier does not support trust policy for cosign verification.

**Proposed Solution**:
1. Deprecate the legacy Cosign verifier and recommend customers to use the new Cosign verifier.

#### License Checker Verifier
**Current Limitation**:
1. The primitive implementation of the licensechecker verifier to support basic verification of license compliance (allowed license list).

**Proposed Solution**:
1. Deprecate the licensechecker verifier and recommend customers to use the new SBOM verifier.

#### `Name` and `Type` fields in verifierReport/configuration
**Current Limitation**:
1. `Name` and `Type` fields in VerifierReport refer to the name and type of the verifier that generated the report. But we got feedback that they're ambiguous and can be misleading.
2. `Name` and `Type` fields in plugin configuration are misused due to historical reasons. It makes the configuration hard to understand.

**Proposed Solution**:
1. Deprecate `Name` and `Type` fields in VerifierReport and recommend customers to use `VerifierName` and `VerifierType` instead.
2. Correct the usage of `Name` and `Type` fields in plugin configuration.

### New Features

> The v2 design mainly focuses on the fundamental refactoring and deprecations that are necessary for the system. In our first prototype or first RC/official release, we may not have new features. However, we should keep the following features in mind to avoid introducing new limitations or breaking changes in the future.

Reviewer: Looking at the whole proposal, it seems primarily focus on the refactoring and deprecation but less on new features. The title seems like look ahead a BIG plan of a new major milestone (v2) but without such detailed context as refactoring and deprecation.  

How about focusing on the refactoring and deprecation only, moving the feature planning to the ROADMAP.md? It would be good to add concrete plans for the whole v2 with each minor milestone (v2.x) in a central roadmap doc.

Reviewer: Thereby, I am thinking this title "Proposal: A more lightweight and extensible framework for Ratify v2". 
Deprecation makes Ratify more lightweight and refactoring is intended for evolving to be a more maintainable and extensible framework.

Author: Good call, my initial idea to add the new feature section is to remind me of those features while refactoring. I would remove it if more reviewers agree on it. And I can also just add link to our roadmap if necessary.

## Scope

Overall, the scope of the v2 design includes the following aspects: system refactoring, deprecations, document update and unit test improvement. We'll discuss each aspect in detail.

Notes: The priority of each task is scored from 1 to 5, with 1 being the highest priority.

### Refactoring

#### Plugin Framework Refactoring
**Current Limitation**:
1. External and internal verifiers are not sharing the same in-memory cache. Each external verifier will have a separate ReferrerStore while created. This could lead to data inconsistency and performance issues.
2. The OCI store behind the ORAS store is not process-safe. This could lead to race conditions when multiple external/interval verifiers are running in parallel. We already have a tracking [issue](https://github.com/ratify-project/ratify/issues/1110).
3. The built-in plugins are tightly coupled with the Ratify core. Plugin version upgrade requires a new Ratify release. And built-in plugins also add dependencies to the Ratify core which makes it hard to maintain.

**Proposed Solution**:
1. We need to refactor the whole plugin framework to make it more lightweight and concurrent-safe. Specifically, we have 2 options:

>    1. Use a plugin framework like [HashiCorp go-plugin](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin) to make Ratify main process communicate with external verifiers through GRPC. And we can have Ratify main process to manage the cache and OCI store while external verifiers will query/set cache through GRPC call.

Reviewer 2: curious if we use grpc , will each instance of plugin be a long living service?

Author: yes, I'm a bit concerned on the performance impact if everything is over gRPC. Probably need to do some benchmark once I have the prototype or just seek for another solution.

**Proposed Solution**:
1. Deprecate the licensechecker verifier and recommend customers to use the new SBOM verifier.

**Priority**: 1

#### `Name` and `Type` fields in verifierReport/configuration
**Current Limitation**:
1. `Name` and `Type` fields in VerifierReport refer to the name and type of the verifier that generated the report. But we got feedback that they're ambiguous and can be misleading.
2. `Name` and `Type` fields in plugin configuration are misused due to historical reasons. It makes the configuration hard to understand.

**Proposed Solution**:
1. Deprecate `Name` and `Type` fields in VerifierReport and recommend customers to use `VerifierName` and `VerifierType` instead.
2. Correct the usage of `Name` and `Type` fields in plugin configuration.

**Priority**: 1

### Documentation Update
Post or along with the v2 release, we should update the documentation to reflect the changes in the v2 design. The documentation update should include the following aspects:
1. Announce deprecations and provide migration guides.
2. Update the architecture and design documents.
3. Update the user guide and CLI reference.
4. Update the developer guide and plugin development guide.

> **Priority**: 3

Reviewer 2: Hi @binbin-li , i believe doc has great value for customers to onboard to Ratify V2. I would suggest doc updates are also pri1

Author: yeah, in terms of recent feedback from community, doc is really important to guide new users to Ratify.

      - [CertificateStore](#certificatestore)
      - [Legacy Cosign Verifier](#legacy-cosign-verifier)
      - [License Checker Verifier](#license-checker-verifier)
      - [`Name` and `Type` fields in verifierReport/configuration](#name-and-type-fields-in-verifierreportconfiguration)
    - [New Features](#new-features)
    - [Documentation Update](#documentation-update)
    - [Unit Test Improvement](#unit-test-improvement)

## Background
Ratify has reached its first major release in over a year and has been widely adopted by users at scale. However, there are known limitations in the current design and implementation of Ratify v1 make it challenging to extend functionality. This document outlines these known limitations and proposes solutions for a more lightweight and extensible framework.

## Goal

The goal of the v2 design is to improve the current design and implementation to better meet the requirements of the customers.

1. Deprecate outdated features so that customers can have a clear understanding of the features that are still supported.
2. Refactor the code to make it more maintainable and extensible for new features.
3. Improve the performance of the system.

> 4. Improve the usability of the system.

Reviewer 3: Have we considered adding new primitives that wrap/simplify the other components. (e.g introduce a new CRD that synthesizes store + verifier + policy). This is similar to the simplification proposed by @yizha1 so that user is only concerned with a single CRD.

Author: yeah, that's good call. I agree that would enhance user experience, but don't have clear idea on it yet. Just wrapping everything up may not be a good solution. And I'm also considering deprecating wrapped CRDs by this new CRD. May need more feedback from @yizha1 as we have discussed it before.

> 5. Reduce the dependencies of the system.

Reviewer 3: +1. This is also becoming a large problem for built-in functionality. Cloud provider specific packages + cosign + notation mean we have a very large # of dependencies imported. Vulnerability and version management has become tricky. Case and point is the volume of dependabot PRs we deal with weekly. Curious to hear any thoughts you have on how we can streamline.

## Scope

> Overall, the scope of the v2 design includes the following aspects: system refactoring, deprecations, new features, document update and unit test improvement. We'll discuss each aspect in detail.

Reviewer 3: How about attestation support that is coming up on the horizon? Attestations are tricky in that they are synthetic bundle of signatures, envelope, and a verifiable artifact. This may introduce a new first class component in Ratify. Would this be out of scope for v2.0.0?

Author: good call! That should be considered in v2.0.0 but will be low prioritized. I feel the problem is that we don't have a clear design for attestation support yet. Basically the v2 prototype should be easy for us to support it without breaking change.

**Proposed Solution**:
1. Decouple the policy evaluation workflow from the executor. This will make it easier to maintain and extend the policy providers.
2. Standardize the result format of the policy providers. This will make it easier for users to switch between different policy providers.
3. Make the rego policy provider as the default policy provider and provide some templates covering most user scenarios.
4. [optional] Remove the config policy provider or fix the limitations/bugs in the config policy provider.

**Priority**: The overall policy provider refactoring is priority 2. But if we want to fix the limitations/bugs in the config policy provider, it can be a task of priority 3.

#### Configuration Refactoring
**Current Limitation**:
1. Ratify CLI does not support all features that are available in the Ratify service. One of the reasons is that the CLI configuration does not support new options, e.g. KeyManagementProvider.
2. Oras store only supports one auth provider. One of the reasons is that the Oras store configuration does not support multiple auth providers. Related issue: [issue-974](https://github.com/ratify-project/ratify/issues/974).

**Proposed Solution**:

> 1. Update the CLI configuration format to be forward-compatible with missing features.

Reviewer 3: I would recommend we remove all of the extra non-essential commands in the CLI today. Even the primary `verify` command will need a large overhaul to provide a better configuration experience. Given the complexity of the config file, I think we need a way for user's to compose the config file from the command flags itself.

Author: I agree. And we don't have much unit tests for CLI, I think it's a good opportunity for us to redesign the CLI commands (deprecate unused ones and add new ones).

> 1. Update the CLI configuration format to be forward-compatible with missing features.

Reviewer 3: I think we also need to reconsider the purpose of the CLI and how it's been used. Ideally, we want user's to be able to use the ratify cli as a standalone tool in their CI/CD pipeline. However, currently, I've heard feedback from folks saying they use the CLI almost as a test bed check to understand and validate what the output of Ratify will be for an image before setting up Ratify on the cluster with a config. If we can help make that configuration workflow transfer more easily between CLI and cluster, it could be valuable. Just some unverified thoughts I have so far :)
